.TH MDEDIT 1 "2026-03-27" "mdedit 1.4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mdedit \- cross-platform Markdown editor with live preview
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mdedit
.RI [ file.md ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B MDEdit
is a lightweight Markdown editor built with Python and PyQt6.
It shows a side-by-side live preview that updates as you type (300 ms debounce).
The preview uses GitHub-style CSS and supports dark and light mode.
.PP
The editor runs on macOS and Windows.
It is a single Python file
.RI ( mdedit.py )
with no external UI dependencies beyond PyQt6, PyQt6-WebEngine (optional), the
.I markdown
library, and Pygments for syntax highlighting.
.SH INSTALL
.B One-line install (macOS/Linux):
.PP
.RS
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/refap3/mdedit/main/install.sh | bash
.RE
.PP
.B One-line install (Windows PowerShell):
.PP
.RS
irm https://raw.githubusercontent.com/refap3/mdedit/main/install.ps1 | iex
.RE
.PP
The installer clones the repo, creates a Python virtual environment, installs dependencies,
and adds the
.B mdedit
command to
.IR ~/.local/bin/ .
.PP
.B Update:
.PP
.RS
mdedit-update
.RE
.PP
.B Manual install:
.PP
.RS
git clone https://github.com/refap3/mdedit.git
.br
cd mdedit
.br
python3 -m venv .venv && .venv/bin/pip install -r requirements.txt
.br
.venv/bin/python mdedit.py
.RE
.SH FEATURES
.TP
.B Multi-tab interface
Open multiple files simultaneously in tabs.
Tabs are closable (× button or
.BR Ctrl+W )
and reorderable by drag.
.TP
.B Session restore
All open tabs are re-opened automatically on next launch, with the previously active tab
selected.
.TP
.B Live preview
HTML preview pane updates 300 ms after you stop typing.
Uses WebEngine (Chromium) if available, falls back to QTextBrowser.
.TP
.B Syntax highlighting
The editor pane highlights headings, bold, italic, strikethrough, inline code, fenced code
blocks, links, and lists.
.TP
.B Auto-reload
When a file is modified externally, the editor silently reloads it.
Uses both a filesystem watcher (immediate) and a 2-second mtime poll (catches atomic-rename
saves from editors like vim).
Reload is skipped if you have unsaved edits.
Switching to a tab also checks for external changes.
.TP
.B Find & Replace
.RB ( Ctrl+F )
Per-tab dialog.
Case-sensitive and whole-word options.
Live match count.
Current match highlighted.
.TP
.B Format helpers
Bold, Italic, Inline Code, Code Block, Link, Image, Table, HR.
Re-applying a format to selected text toggles it off.
.TP
.B Markdown extensions
Tables, fenced code blocks, table of contents, syntax-highlighted code blocks via Pygments.
.TP
.B File operations
New Tab, Open, Save, Save As, Export to HTML.
The toolbar Open button is a split button: click to open a file dialog,
click the arrow to pick from the last 10 recent files.
Full Open Recent submenu also in the File menu.
.TP
.B Persistent state
Window size, splitter position, dark/light mode, preview visibility, word wrap, recent files,
and open tabs are remembered across launches.
.TP
.B Dark mode
Toggle via
.B View > Dark Mode.
The editor, preview CSS, and all UI chrome switch to dark colours.
.TP
.B Toolbar Help menu
A
.B Help
dropdown button in the toolbar gives one-click access to the Markdown
Reference, Keyboard Shortcuts, and About dialog.
.TP
.B Version
Shown in the About dialog
.RB ( Help > About
or the toolbar Help button).
Also reported via
.B Help > About
as Python version, Qt version, and MDEdit version.
.SH KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
On macOS,
.I Ctrl
maps to the Command key (⌘) except tab-navigation shortcuts which use the physical Control key (^).
.TS
l l.
Ctrl+T	New Tab
Ctrl+W	Close Tab
^Tab	Next Tab (Control+Tab)
^Shift+Tab	Previous Tab
Ctrl+O	Open file
Ctrl+S	Save
Ctrl+Shift+S	Save As
Ctrl+Q	Quit
Ctrl+Z	Undo
Ctrl+Y	Redo
Ctrl+X / Ctrl+C / Ctrl+V	Cut / Copy / Paste
Ctrl+A	Select All
Ctrl+F	Find & Replace
Ctrl+Shift+P	Toggle preview pane
Ctrl+Shift+Up	Zoom In
Ctrl+Shift+Down	Zoom Out
Ctrl+0	Reset Zoom
Ctrl+Shift+B	Bold
Ctrl+Shift+I	Italic
.TE
.SH PROJECT STRUCTURE
.TS
l l.
mdedit.py	Main application (single file)
mdedit.spec	PyInstaller bundle config
build.sh	Build .app + .dmg (macOS)
install.sh	One-line installer (macOS/Linux)
install.ps1	One-line installer (Windows PowerShell)
update.sh	Updater (macOS/Linux)
update.ps1	Updater (Windows)
requirements.txt	Python dependencies
.TE
.SH BUILDING
.B macOS .app + .dmg:
.PP
.RS
./build.sh
.RE
.PP
Produces
.I dist/MDEdit.app
and
.IR dist/MDEdit.dmg .
PyInstaller is installed automatically into
.I .venv
if not present.
.PP
After a build, these can be deleted:
.PP
.RS
rm -rf build/ dist/ __pycache__/ [.venv/]
.RE
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
Python 3.10+
.TP
PyQt6 >= 6.4
.TP
PyQt6-WebEngine
Optional. Falls back to QTextBrowser if not installed.
.TP
markdown
Python Markdown library with extensions (tables, fenced_code, toc, codehilite).
.TP
Pygments
Syntax-highlighted code blocks in the preview.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python3 (1)
.SH VIEW THIS PAGE
.RS
man mdedit
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
rainers
